Medicare Benefit Policy Manual, Chapter 15 - Covered Medical and Other Health Services
Section 110-110.1 - Durable Medical Equipment, General and Definition

110 - Durable Medical Equipment - General 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
B3-2100, A3-3113, HO-235, HHA-220 

Expenses incurred by a beneficiary for the rental or purchases of durable medical equipment (DME) are 
reimbursable if the following three requirements are met: 

• The equipment meets the definition of DME (§110.1); 

• The equipment is necessary and reasonable for the treatment of the patient’s illness or injury or to 
improve the functioning of his or her malformed body member (§110.1); and 

• The equipment is used in the patient’s home. 

The decision whether to rent or purchase an item of equipment generally resides with the beneficiary, but the 
decision on how to pay rests with CMS. For some DME, program payment policy calls for lump sum 
payments and in others for periodic payment. Where covered DME is furnished to a beneficiary by a 
supplier of services other than a provider of services, the DME MAC makes the reimbursement. If a 
provider of services furnishes the equipment, the A/B MAC (A) or (HHH) makes the reimbursement. The 
payment method is identified in the annual fee schedule update furnished by CMS. 

The CMS issues quarterly updates to a fee schedule file that contains rates by HCPCS code and also 
identifies the classification of the HCPCS code within the following categories. 

Category Code Definition 
IN Inexpensive and Other Routinely Purchased Items 
FS Frequently Serviced Items 
CR Capped Rental Items 
OX Oxygen and Oxygen Equipment 
OS Ostomy, Tracheostomy & Urological Items 
SD Surgical Dressings 
PO Prosthetics & Orthotics 
SU Supplies 
TE Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulators 

The A/B MACs (A), (B), and (HHH), and DME MACs, where appropriate, use the CMS files to determine 
payment rules. See the Medicare Claims Processing Manual, Chapter 20, “Durable Medical Equipment, 
Surgical Dressings and Casts, Orthotics and Artificial Limbs, and Prosthetic Devices,” for a detailed 
description of payment rules for each classification. 

Payment may also be made for repairs, maintenance, and delivery of equipment and for expendable and 
nonreusable items essential to the effective use of the equipment subject to the conditions in §110.2. 

See the Medicare Benefit Policy Manual, Chapter 11, “End Stage Renal Disease,” for hemodialysis 
equipment and supplies. 

110.1 - Definition of Durable Medical Equipment 
(Rev. 10880, Issued: 08-06-21, Effective: 11-08-21, Implementation: 11-08-21) 

Durable medical equipment is equipment which: 

• Can withstand repeated use; 

• Is primarily and customarily used to serve a medical purpose; 

• Generally is not useful to a person in the absence of an illness or injury; and 

• Is appropriate for use in the home. 

All requirements of the definition must be met before an item can be considered to be durable medical 
equipment. 

The following describes the underlying policies for determining whether an item meets the definition of 
DME and may be covered. 

A. Durability 

An item is considered durable if it can withstand repeated use, i.e., the type of item that could normally be 
rented. Medical supplies of an expendable nature, such as incontinent pads, lambs wool pads, catheters, ace 
bandages, elastic stockings, surgical facemasks, irrigating kits, sheets, and bags are not considered “durable” 
within the meaning of the definition. There are other items that, although durable in nature, may fall into 
other coverage categories such as supplies, braces, prosthetic devices, artificial arms, legs, and eyes. 

B. Medical Equipment 

Medical equipment is equipment primarily and customarily used for medical purposes and is not generally 
useful in the absence of illness or injury. In most instances, no development will be needed to determine 
whether a specific item of equipment is medical in nature. However, some cases will require development 
to determine whether the item constitutes medical equipment. This development would include the advice 
of local medical organizations (hospitals, medical schools, medical societies) and specialists in the field of 
physical medicine and rehabilitation. If the equipment is new on the market, it may be necessary, prior to 
seeking professional advice, to obtain information from the supplier or manufacturer explaining the design, 
purpose, effectiveness and method of using the equipment in the home as well as the results of any tests or 
clinical studies that have been conducted. 

1. Equipment Presumptively Medical 

Items such as hospital beds, wheelchairs, hemodialysis equipment, iron lungs, respirators, intermittent 
positive pressure breathing machines, medical regulators, oxygen tents, crutches, canes, trapeze bars, 
walkers, inhalators, nebulizers, commodes, suction machines, and traction equipment presumptively 
constitute medical equipment. (Although hemodialysis equipment is covered as a prosthetic device (§120), 
it also meets the definition of DME, and reimbursement for the rental or purchase of such equipment for use 
in the beneficiary’s home will be made only under the provisions for payment applicable to DME. See the 
Medicare Benefit Policy Manual, Chapter 11, “End Stage Renal Disease,” §30.1, for coverage of home use 
of hemodialysis.) NOTE: There is a wide variety in types of respirators and suction machines. The DME 
MACs medical staff should determine whether the apparatus specified in the claim is appropriate for home 
use. 

2. Equipment Presumptively Nonmedical 

Equipment which is primarily and customarily used for a nonmedical purpose may not be considered 
“medical” equipment for which payment can be made under the medical insurance program. This is true 
even though the item has some remote medically related use. For example, in the case of a cardiac patient, 
an air conditioner might possibly be used to lower room temperature to reduce fluid loss in the patient and to 
restore an environment conducive to maintenance of the proper fluid balance. Nevertheless, because the 
primary and customary use of an air conditioner is a nonmedical one, the air conditioner cannot be deemed 
to be medical equipment for which payment can be made. 

Other devices and equipment used for environmental control or to enhance the environmental setting in 
which the beneficiary is placed are not considered covered DME. These include, for example, room heaters, 
humidifiers, dehumidifiers, and electric air cleaners. Equipment which basically serves comfort or 
convenience functions or is primarily for the convenience of a person caring for the patient, such as 
elevators, stairway elevators, and posture chairs, do not constitute medical equipment. Similarly, physical 
fitness equipment (such as an exercycle), first-aid or precautionary-type equipment (such as preset portable 
oxygen units), self-help devices (such as safety grab bars), and training equipment (such as Braille training 
texts) are considered nonmedical in nature. 

3. Special Exception Items 

Specified items of equipment may be covered under certain conditions even though they do not meet the 
definition of DME because they are not primarily and customarily used to serve a medical purpose and/or 
are generally useful in the absence of illness or injury. These items would be covered when it is clearly 
established that they serve a therapeutic purpose in an individual case and would include: 

a. Gel pads and pressure and water mattresses (which generally serve a preventive purpose) 
when prescribed for a patient who had bed sores or there is medical evidence indicating that 
they are highly susceptible to such ulceration; and 

b. Heat lamps for a medical rather than a soothing or cosmetic purpose, e.g., where the need for 
heat therapy has been established. 

In establishing medical necessity for the above items, the evidence must show that the item is included in the 
physician’s course of treatment and a physician is supervising its use. 

NOTE: The above items represent special exceptions and no extension of coverage to other items should be 
inferred. 

C. Necessary and Reasonable 

Although an item may be classified as DME, it may not be covered in every instance. Coverage in a 
particular case is subject to the requirement that the equipment be necessary and reasonable for treatment of 
an illness or injury, or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member. These considerations will 
bar payment for equipment which cannot reasonably be expected to perform a therapeutic function in an 
individual case or will permit only partial therapeutic function in an individual case or will permit only 
partial payment when the type of equipment furnished substantially exceeds that required for the treatment 
of the illness or injury involved. 

See the Medicare Claims Processing Manual, Chapter 1, “General Billing Requirements;” §60, regarding the 
rules for providing advance beneficiary notices (ABNs) that advise beneficiaries, before items or services 
actually are furnished, when Medicare is likely to deny payment for them. ABNs allow beneficiaries to 
make an informed consumer decision about receiving items or services for which they may have to pay out-
of-pocket and to be more active participants in their own health care treatment decisions. 

1. Necessity for the Equipment 

Equipment is necessary when it can be expected to make a meaningful contribution to the treatment of the 
patient’s illness or injury or to the improvement of his or her malformed body member. In most cases the 
physician’s prescription for the equipment and other medical information available to the DME MAC will 
be sufficient to establish that the equipment serves this purpose. 

2. Reasonableness of the Equipment 

Even though an item of DME may serve a useful medical purpose, the DME MAC or A/B MAC (A) must 
also consider to what extent, if any, it would be reasonable for the Medicare program to pay for the item 
prescribed. The following considerations should enter into the determination of reasonableness: 

1. Would the expense of the item to the program be clearly disproportionate to the therapeutic 
benefits which could ordinarily be derived from use of the equipment? 

2. Is the item substantially more costly than a medically appropriate and realistically feasible 
alternative pattern of care? 

3. Does the item serve essentially the same purpose as equipment already available to the 
beneficiary? 

3. Payment Consistent With What is Necessary and Reasonable 

Where a claim is filed for equipment containing features of an aesthetic nature or features of a medical 
nature which are not required by the patient’s condition or where there exists a reasonably feasible and 
medically appropriate alternative pattern of care which is less costly than the equipment furnished, the 
amount payable is based on the rate for the equipment or alternative treatment which meets the patient’s 
medical needs. 

The acceptance of an assignment binds the supplier-assignee to accept the payment for the medically 
required equipment or service as the full charge and the supplier-assignee cannot charge the beneficiary the 
differential attributable to the equipment actually furnished. 

4. Establishing the Period of Medical Necessity 

Generally, the period of time an item of durable medical equipment will be considered to be medically 
necessary is based on the physician’s estimate of the time that his or her patient will need the equipment. 
See the Medicare Program Integrity Manual, Chapters 5 and 6, for medical review guidelines. 

D. Definition of a Beneficiary’s Home 

For purposes of rental and purchase of DME a beneficiary’s home may be his/her own dwelling, an 
apartment, a relative’s home, a home for the aged, or some other type of institution (such as an assisted 
living facility, or an intermediate care facility for individuals with intellectual disabilities (ICF/IID)). 
However, an institution may not be considered a beneficiary’s home if it: 

• Meets at least the basic requirement (see §1861(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (the Act)) in the 
definition of a hospital, i.e., it is primarily engaged in providing by or under the supervision of 
physicians, to inpatients, diagnostic and therapeutic services for medical diagnosis, treatment, and 
care of injured, disabled, and sick persons, or rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation of injured, 
disabled, or sick persons; or 

• Meets at least the basic requirement (see §1819(a)(1) of the Act) in the definition of a skilled nursing 
facility, i.e., it is primarily engaged in providing to inpatients skilled nursing care and related 
services for patients who require medical or nursing care, or rehabilitation services for the 
rehabilitation of injured, disabled, or sick persons. 

Thus, if an individual is a patient in an institution or distinct part of an institution which provides the 
services described in the bullets above, the individual is not entitled to have separate Part B payment made 
for rental or purchase of DME. This is because such an institution may not be considered the individual’s 
home (see §§1861(s)(6) and 1861(n) of the Act, the implementing regulations at 42 CFR 410.38(b), and 
§2160B in the State Operations Manual (SOM, Pub. 100-07), Chapter 2). 

As indicated in §2164 of the SOM, Chapter 2, all hospitals and SNFs that are Medicare-certified are 
automatically considered to meet the basic requirement described in the applicable bullet above by reason of 
the Medicare certification itself. Moreover, even an institution (or portion of an institution) that is not 
certified for Medicare is precluded from being considered a patient’s home in this context if it meets either 
of these basic requirements. See §2166 of the SOM, Chapter 2, for the administrative criteria used in 
determining whether the basic requirement in the “SNF” definition is met by a nursing home that is not 
Medicare-certified (including the non-Medicare portion of an institution that also contains a Medicare-
certified distinct part SNF). 

If the patient is at home for part of a month and, for part of the same month is in an institution that cannot 
qualify as his or her home, or is outside the U.S., monthly payments may be made for the entire month. 
Similarly, if DME is returned to the provider before the end of a payment month because the beneficiary 
died in that month or because the equipment became unnecessary in that month, payment may be made for 
the entire month.