Medicare Benefit Policy Manual, Chapter 1 - Inpatient Hospital Services Covered Under Part A
Section 10.2 - Hospital Inpatient Admission Order and Certification

10.2 – Hospital Inpatient Admission Order and Certification 
(Rev. 234, Issued: 03-10-17, Effective: 01-01-16, Implementation: 06-12-17) 

The order to admit as an inpatient (“practitioner order”) is a critical element in clarifying 
when an individual is considered an inpatient of a hospital, including a critical access 
hospital (CAH), and is therefore required for all hospital inpatient cases for hospital 
inpatient coverage and payment under Part A. As a condition of payment for hospital 
inpatient services under Medicare Part A, according to section 1814(a) of the Social 
Security Act, CMS is requiring, only for long-stay cases and outlier cases, separate 
physician certification of the medical necessity that such services be provided on an 
inpatient basis. The signed physician certification is considered, along with other 
documentation in the medical record, as evidence that hospital inpatient service(s) were 
reasonable and necessary. 

The following guidance applies to all inpatient hospital and CAH services unless 
otherwise specified. For the remainder of this guidance, references to hospitals includes 
CAHs. The complete requirements for the physician certification are found in 42 CFR 
Part 424 subpart B, and requirements for admission orders are found at 42 CFR 412.3. 

A. Physician Certification. Physician certification of inpatient services is required 
for cases that are 20 inpatient days or more (long-stay cases), for outlier cases of 
hospitals other than inpatient psychiatric facilities and for cases of CAHs. (See 
CY 2015 Outpatient Prospective Payment System Final Rule, 79 FR 66997 and 
42 CFR 412 Subpart F, 42 CFR 424.13 and 42 CFR 424.15): 

1. Content: The physician certification includes the following information: 

a. Reason for inpatient services: The physician certifies the reasons for 
either— (i) Continued hospitalization of the patient for inpatient medical 
treatment or medically required inpatient diagnostic study; or (ii) Special 
or unusual services for outlier cases under the applicable prospective 
payment system for inpatient services. For example, documentation of an 
admitting diagnosis could fulfill this part of the certification requirement. 

b. The estimated (or actual) time the beneficiary requires or required in the 
hospital: The physician certifies the estimated time in the hospital the 
beneficiary requires (if the certification is completed prior to discharge) or 
the actual time in the hospital (if the certification is completed at 
discharge). Estimated or actual length of stay is most commonly reflected 
in the progress notes where the practitioner discusses the assessment and 
plan. For the purposes of meeting the requirement for certification, 
expected or actual length of stay may be documented in the order or a 
separate certification or recertification form, but it is also acceptable if 
discussed in the progress notes assessment and plan or as part of routine 
discharge planning. 

If the reason an inpatient is still in the hospital is that they are waiting for 
availability of a skilled nursing facility (SNF) bed, the regulations at 42 
CFR 424.13(c) and 424.14(e) provide that a beneficiary who is already 
appropriately an inpatient can be kept in the hospital as an inpatient if the 
only reason they remain in the hospital is they are waiting for a post-acute 
SNF bed. The physician may certify the need for continued inpatient 
admission on this basis. 

c. The plans for posthospital care, if appropriate, and as provided in 42 CFR 
424.13. 

d. For inpatient CAH services only, the physician must certify that the 
beneficiary may reasonably be expected to be discharged or transferred to 
a hospital within 96 hours after admission to the CAH. 

Time as an outpatient at the CAH does not count towards the 96 hour 
certification requirement. The clock for the 96 hour certification 
requirement only begins once the individual is admitted to the CAH as an 
inpatient. Time in a CAH swing-bed also does not count towards the 96 
hour certification requirement. 

The 96-hour certification requirement is based on an expectation at the 
time of admission. If a physician certifies in good faith that an individual 
may reasonably be expected to be discharged or transferred to a hospital 
within 96 hours after admission to the CAH, and something unforeseen 
occurs that causes the individual to stay longer at the CAH, the CAH 
would be paid for that unforeseen extended inpatient stay as long as that 
individual’s stay does not cause the CAH to exceed its 96-hour annual 
average condition of participation requirement. However, if a physician 
cannot in good faith certify that an individual may reasonably be expected 
to be discharged or transferred within 96 hours after admission to the 
CAH, the CAH will not receive Medicare reimbursement for any portion 
of that individual’s inpatient stay. This would be determined based on a 
medical review of the case. 

All certification requirements must be completed, signed, and documented 
in the medical record no later than 1 day before the date on which the 
claim for payment for the inpatient CAH service is submitted, as provided 
in the FY15 IPPS Final Rule and 42 CFR 424.11 and 42 CFR 424.15. 

e. Inpatient Rehabilitation Facilities (IRFs): The documentation that IRFs 
are already required to complete to meet the IRF coverage requirements 
(such as the preadmission screening (including the physician review and 
concurrence), the post-admission physician evaluation, and the required 
admission orders) may be used to satisfy the certification and 
recertification statement requirements. 

2. Timing: Outlier cases must be certified and recertified as provided in 42 CFR 
424.13. Under extenuating circumstances, delayed initial certification or 
recertification of an outlier case may be acceptable as long as it does not 
extend past discharge. For all other long stay cases, the certification must be 
signed and documented no later than 20 days into the inpatient portion of the 
hospital stay. 

3. Authorization to sign the certification: The certification or recertification 
may be signed only by one of the following: 

(1) A physician who is a doctor of medicine or osteopathy. 
(2) A dentist in the circumstances specified in 42 CFR 424.13(d). 
(3) A doctor of podiatric medicine if his or her certification is consistent 
with the functions he or she is authorized to perform under state law. 

Certifications and recertifications must be signed by the physician responsible 
for the case, or by another physician who has knowledge of the case and who 
is authorized to do so by the responsible physician or by the hospital’s 
medical staff (or by the dentist as provided in 42 CFR 424.11 and 42 CFR 
424.13). CMS considers only the following physicians, podiatrists or dentists 
to have sufficient knowledge of the case to serve as the certifying physician: 
the admitting physician of record (“attending”) or a physician on call for him 
or her; a surgeon responsible for a major surgical procedure on the beneficiary 
or a surgeon on call for him or her; a dentist functioning as the admitting 
physician of record or as the surgeon responsible for a major dental procedure; 
and, in the specific case of a non‐physician non‐dentist admitting practitioner 
who is licensed by the state and has been granted privileges by the facility, a 
physician member of the hospital staff (such as a physician member of the 
utilization review committee) who has reviewed the case and who also enters 
into the record a complete certification statement that specifically contains all 
of the content elements discussed above. The admitting physician of record 
may be an emergency department physician or hospitalist. CMS does not 
require the certifying physician to have inpatient admission privileges at the 
hospital. 

4. Format: As specified in 42 CFR 424.11, no specific procedures or forms are 
required for certification and recertification statements. The provider may 
adopt any method that permits verification. The certification and 
recertification statements may be entered on forms, notes, or records that the 
appropriate individual signs, or on a special separate form. Except as 
provided for delayed certifications, there must be a separate signed statement 
for each certification or recertification. If all the required information is 
included in progress notes, the physician's statement could indicate that the 
individual's medical record contains the information required and that hospital 
inpatient services are or continue to be medically necessary. 

B. Inpatient Order: A Medicare beneficiary is considered an inpatient of a hospital 
if formally admitted as an inpatient pursuant to an order for inpatient admission 
by an ordering practitioner. As stated in the FY 2014 IPPS Final Rule, 78 FR 
50908 and 50941, and as conveyed in 42 CFR 482.24, if the order is not properly 
documented in the medical record prior to discharge, the hospital should not 
submit a claim for Part A payment. Meeting the two midnight benchmark does 
not, in itself, render a beneficiary an inpatient or serve to qualify them for 
payment under Part A. Rather, as provided in Medicare regulations, a beneficiary 
is considered an inpatient (and Part A payment may only be made) if they are 
formally admitted as such pursuant to an order for inpatient admission by an 
ordering practitioner. 

With regard to the time of discharge, a Medicare beneficiary is considered a 
patient of the hospital until the effectuation of activities typically specified by the 
ordering practitioner as having to occur prior to discharge (e.g., “discharge after 
supper” or “discharge after voids”). Thus, discharge itself can but does not 
always coincide exactly with the time that the discharge order is written, rather it 
occurs when the ordering practitioner’s order for discharge is effectuated. 

1. Content: The ordering practitioner’s order contains the instruction that the 
beneficiary should be formally admitted for hospital inpatient care. The order 
must specify admission for inpatient services. Inpatient rehabilitation 
facilities (IRFs) must adhere to the admission requirements specified in 42 
CFR 412.622. The two midnight benchmark does not apply in IRFs. 

2. Qualifications of the ordering/admitting practitioner: The order must be 
furnished by a physician or other practitioner (“ordering practitioner”) who is: 
(a) licensed by the state to admit inpatients to hospitals, (b) granted privileges 
by the hospital to admit inpatients to that specific facility, and (c) 
knowledgeable about the patient’s hospital course, medical plan of care, and 
current condition at the time of admission. See section (B)(3) for a discussion 
of the requirements to be knowledgeable about the patient’s hospital course. 
The ordering practitioner makes the determination of medical necessity for 
inpatient care and renders the admission decision. The ordering practitioner is 
not required to write the order but must authenticate (sign, or in the case of an 
initial order (under (B)(2)(a)) or a verbal order (under (B)(2)(b)), countersign) 
the order reflecting that he or she has made the decision to admit the patient 
for inpatient services. 

The admission decision (order) may not be delegated to another individual 
who is not authorized by the state to admit patients, or has not been granted 
admitting privileges by the hospital's medical staff. However, a medical 
resident, physician assistant, nurse practitioner, or other non-physician 
practitioner may act as a proxy for the ordering practitioner provided they are 
authorized under state law to admit patients and the requirements outlined 
below are met (FY 14 IPPS Final Rule and 42 CFR 412.3(b)). 

a. Residents and non-physician practitioners authorized to make initial 
admission decisions - Certain non-physician practitioners and residents 
working within their residency program are authorized by the state in 
which the hospital is located to admit inpatients, and are allowed by 
hospital by-laws or policies to do the same. The ordering practitioner may 
allow these individuals to write inpatient admission orders on his or her 
behalf, if the ordering practitioner approves and accepts responsibility for 
the admission decision by authenticating (countersigning) the order prior 
to discharge. (See (A)(2) for guidance regarding the definition of 
discharge time and (B)(3) for more guidance regarding knowledge of a 
patient’s hospital course). In authenticating (countersigning) the order, the 
ordering practitioner approves and accepts responsibility for the admission 
decision. This process may also be used for practitioners (such as 
emergency department physicians) who do not have admitting privileges 
but are authorized by the hospital to issue temporary or “bridge” inpatient 
admission orders. 

b. Verbal orders- At some hospitals, individuals who lack the authority to 
admit inpatients under state laws and hospital by‐laws (such as a 
registered nurse) may nonetheless enter the inpatient admission order as a 
verbal order. In these cases, the ordering practitioner directly 
communicates the inpatient admission order to staff as a verbal (not 
standing) order, and the ordering practitioner need not separately record 
the order to admit. Following discussion with and at the direction of the 
ordering practitioner, a verbal order for inpatient admission may be 
documented by an individual who is not qualified to admit patients in his 
or her own right, as long as that documentation (transcription) of the order 
for inpatient admission is in accordance with state law including; scope‐
of‐practice laws, hospital policies, and medical staff bylaws, rules, and 
regulations. In this case, the staff receiving the verbal order must 
document the verbal order in the medical record at the time it is received. 
The order must identify the ordering practitioner and must be 
authenticated (countersigned) by the ordering practitioner promptly and 
prior to discharge. Example: “Admit to inpatient per Dr. Smith” would 
be considered an acceptable method of identifying the ordering 
practitioner and would meet the verbal order requirement if the verbal 
order (1) is appropriately documented in the medical record by the 
individual receiving the verbal order when the order is received; and (2) is 
authenticated (countersigned) by Dr. Smith promptly, prior to discharge. 

c. Standing orders and protocols - The inpatient admission order cannot be 
a standing order. While Medicare’s rules do not prohibit use of a protocol 
or algorithm that is part of a protocol, only the ordering practitioner, or a 
resident or other practitioner acting on his or her behalf under section 
(B)(2)(a) can make and take responsibility for the inpatient admission 
decision. 

d. Commencement of inpatient status - Inpatient status begins at the time 
of formal admission by the hospital pursuant to the order, including an 
initial order (under (B)(2)(a)) or a verbal order (under (B)(2)(b)) that is 
authenticated (countersigned) timely, by authorized individuals, as 
required in this section. If the practitioner responsible for authenticating 
(countersigning) an initial order or verbal order does not agree that 
inpatient admission was appropriate or valid (including an unauthorized 
verbal order), he or she should not authenticate (countersign) the order and 
the beneficiary is not considered to be an inpatient. The hospital stay may 
be billed to Part B as a hospital outpatient encounter. 

3. Knowledge of the patient’s hospital course: CMS considers only the 
following practitioners to have sufficient knowledge about the beneficiary’s 
hospital course, medical plan of care, and current condition to serve as the 
ordering practitioner: the admitting physician of record (“attending”) or a 
physician on call for him or her, primary or covering hospitalists caring for the 
patient in the hospital, the beneficiary’s primary care practitioner or a 
physician on call for the primary care practitioner, a surgeon responsible for a 
major surgical procedure on the beneficiary or a surgeon on call for him or 
her, emergency or clinic practitioners caring for the beneficiary at the point of 
inpatient admission, and other practitioners qualified to admit inpatients and 
actively treating the beneficiary at the point of the inpatient admission 
decision. A utilization review committee physician functioning in that role 
does not have direct responsibility for the care of the patient and is therefore 
not considered to be sufficiently knowledgeable to order the inpatient 
admission. The order must be written by one of the above practitioners 
directly involved with the care of the beneficiary, and a utilization committee 
physician may only write the order to admit if he or she is not acting in a 
utilization review capacity and fulfills one of the direct patient care roles, such 
as the attending physician. Utilization review may not be conducted by any 
individual who was professionally involved in the care of the patient whose 
case is being reviewed (42 CFR 482.30(d)(3)). 

4. Timing: The order must be furnished at or before the time of the inpatient 
admission. The order can be written in advance of the formal admission (e.g., 
for a pre‐scheduled surgery), but the inpatient admission does not occur until 
hospital care services are provided to the beneficiary. Conversely, in the 
unusual case in which a patient is admitted as an inpatient prior to an order to 
admit and there is no documented verbal order, the inpatient stay should not 
be considered to commence until the inpatient admission order is documented. 
CMS does not permit retroactive orders. Authentication by the ordering 
practitioner of the order (either by signature or, in the case of an initial order 
under (B)(2)(a) or a verbal order under (B)(2)(b), countersignature) is required 
prior to discharge for all inpatient cases. 

5. Specificity of the Order: The regulations at 42 CFR 412.3 require that, as a 
condition of payment, an order for inpatient admission must be present in the 
medical record. The preamble of the FY 2014 IPPS Final Rule at 78 FR 
50942 states, “the order must specify the admitting practitioner’s 
recommendation to admit ‘to inpatient,’ ‘as an inpatient,’ ‘for inpatient 
services,’ or similar language specifying his or her recommendation for 
inpatient care. While CMS does not require specific language to be used on 
the inpatient admission order, it is in the interest of the hospital that the 
ordering practitioner use language that clearly expresses intent to admit the 
patient as inpatient that will be commonly understood by any individual who 
could potentially review documentation of the inpatient stay. CMS does not 
recommend using language that may have specific meaning only to 
individuals that work in a particular hospital (e.g., “admit to 7W”) that will 
not be commonly understood by others outside of the hospital. 

If admission order language used to specify inpatient or outpatient status is 
ambiguous, the best course of action would be to obtain and document 
clarification from the ordering practitioner before initial Medicare billing 
(ideally before the beneficiary is discharged). Under this policy, CMS will 
continue to treat orders that specify a typically outpatient or other limited 
service (e.g., admit “to ER,” “to Observation,” “to Recovery,” “to Outpatient 
Surgery,” “to Day Surgery,” or “to Short Stay Surgery”) as defining a non‐
inpatient service, and such orders will not be treated as meeting the inpatient 
admission requirements. 

The admission order is evidence of the decision by the ordering practitioner to 
admit the beneficiary to inpatient status. In extremely rare circumstances, the 
order to admit may be missing or defective (that is, illegible, or incomplete, 
for example “inpatient” is not specified), yet the intent, decision, and 
recommendation of the ordering practitioner to admit the beneficiary as an 
inpatient can clearly be derived from the medical record. In these extremely 
rare situations, contractors have been provided with discretion to determine 
that this information constructively satisfies the requirement that the hospital 
inpatient admission order be present in the medical record. However, in order 
for the documentation to provide acceptable evidence to support the hospital 
inpatient admission, thus satisfying the requirement for the order, there can be 
no uncertainty regarding the intent, decision, and recommendation by the 
ordering practitioner to admit the beneficiary as an inpatient, and no 
reasonable possibility that the care could have been adequately provided in an 
outpatient setting. 

This narrow and limited alternative method of satisfying the requirement for 
documentation of the inpatient admission order in the medical record should be extremely 
rare, and may only be applied at the discretion of the contractor.